
and Inositol-trisphosphate 3-kinase A (Itpka) were downregulated in mHtt mice brain, whereas Methylthioribose-1-phosphate isomerase (Mri1) was upregulated, which is in correlation with a study of Skotte and colleagues (40). Several proteins that were enriched in the mutant Htt insoluble fractions were also identified in Htt aggregates in other studies, for instance Alpha-internexin (Ina), Vimentin (Vim), Transformer-2 protein homolog alpha (Tra2a) (39) and Ubiquilin-2 (Ubqln2) (41). Taken together, several proteins that were differentially expressed in fl Q175 mHtt brains in our study were also found to be differentially expressed in other HD models. Comparison with transcriptome data in the striatum and cortex of the same mouse model with the same age (47) did not show any overlap with our global proteome data (Table S6), probably reflecting the difference between gene expression and protein expression. Htt Ubiquitination Pattern in Soluble and Insoluble Fractions—In this work we identified diGly peptides for Htt K6, K9, K132, K804, and K837 in the soluble fractions, indicating that soluble Htt is ubiquitinated in mice brain samples. We observed differential ubiquitination of wild-type and mutant soluble Htt i.e. diGly peptides derived from wild-type Htt harbored primarily diGly motifs at K132 and K804, and rarely the motif was found at K837, whereas diGly peptides of soluble mHtt harbored the K6 and/or K9 diGly motifs. As proteins were digested into peptides our data does not reveal whether the full-length mHtt protein or only smaller fragments were ubiquitinated. In the insoluble fraction we observed that mHtt was more ubiquitinated at K6 and K9 as compared with wild type. It has been established that aggregates of Htt are decorated with ubiquitin. Our lab showed previously through mutation of the three putative ubiquitination sites in mHtt exon1 that aggregated mHtt was polyubiquitinated in its N-terminal region in neuronal inclusion bodies (23). Recently, we found by a gelbased mass spectrometry approach and by SDS-PAGE WB that aggregated mHtt-exon1 was K48 polyubiquitinated at K6 in N2a cells (manuscript in preparation). Our present data shows that mHtt in the insoluble fraction is ubiquitinated at K6 and/or K9. Finding more Htt diGly sites than in the previous study might be explained by the application of a diGly peptide enrichment method which increases the depth of the analysis for diGly peptides. However, the difference might also be due to a different biological background (cell culture versus mice brain tissue, Htt exon1 versus full-length Htt). In our present study, we observed an upregulation of the K48 diGly site derived from ubiquitin in the insoluble fraction of mutant Htt samples, suggesting that mHtt aggregates are K48 polyubiquitinated, which agrees with our manuscript in preparation as well as with the study of Yau et al. They found, with the use of ubiquitin K11/K48 bispecific antibodies, that aggregated mHtt was K11 and K48 polyubiquitinated in different cell types, differentiated neurons and mice brain tissue (48). 

Further, Yau et al. found that upon mHtt expression Ubiquilin-2 was K11- and K48-polyubiquitinated (48). We observed increased protein levels of Ubiquilin-2 in the insoluble fraction. Both in wild-type and mutant Htt soluble fractions Ubiquilin-2 was ubiquitinated at K58 to a similar extent. Additionally, soluble Ubiquilin-2 was ubiquitinated at K43 only in the mutant Htt samples. In the insoluble fraction Ubiquilin-2 was only ubiquitinated in the mutant samples; at K58 and K66. All these sites are in the UBL domain. Ubiquilin-2 has been shown to associate with mHtt aggregates (41) and to mediate the clearance of aggregates via the proteasome (49). The cause and role of increased ubiquitination of the UBL domain of Ubiquilin-2 in the insoluble fraction requires further investigation. Recently two ubiquitin ligases with specificity for mHtt were reported, UBR4 and UBR5 (48). Unfortunately, our data gave no information about UBR5 because we did not identify peptides for this protein. We only identified UBR4 in the global proteome dataset of the insoluble fraction; however, no statistically significant differences were observed between wildtype and mutant samples. Htt Protein Level Was Decreased in the Soluble Fraction of mHtt Mice as Compared with Wild Types—When examined at the age of 40 weeks, we observed a strong decrease of soluble Htt protein levels in mutant Htt mice when compared with wtHtt mice. This is in accordance with earlier work showing that Q175FDN mice display an age-dependent decline of mHtt protein levels in the cortex and striatum (25, 50). The reduction of mHtt could have been caused by reduced efficiency in transcription and/or translation of the mHtt gene and/or mRNA, respectively (25). Soluble Htt protein levels could have been additionally reduced because of sequestration in inclusion bodies. We observed significantly increased Htt K6 and K9 ubiquitination in the mHtt insoluble samples by diGly peptide enrichment. This suggests that at least a part of the Htt pool is present in the insoluble fraction. Finally, soluble Htt protein levels could have been reduced by degradation. Therefore, we tested whether soluble fl mHtt is a target for degradation in striatal cells (StHdh Q111/111). We observed a small increase in the level of soluble full-length mHtt after proteasome inhibition and after autophagy inhibition, suggesting that a part of the soluble full-length mHtt protein is targeted for degradation (supplemental Fig. S4A and S4B). It remains to be investigated whether the pool of mHtt that is targeted for degradation is the same pool as that was found to be ubiquitinated in the soluble fraction. The pool of soluble ubiquitinated Htt is however rather small (manuscript in preparation), which makes it difficult to study this in detail. Pathway Analysis—First, we observed changes in the global proteome and ubiquitinome in proteins with a role in membrane organization and transport, translation and catabolic processes in the soluble fraction. These processes were also affected in the insoluble fraction at the protein level. Huntingtin plays different roles in cellular membrane and vesicle trafficking through interaction with microtubule-based ki