
nesin and dynein motor proteins and with the actin-associated motor myosin VI (51). We observed that several components of the vesicle trafficking and intracellular transport network, such as huntingtin-interacting protein 1-related protein (Hip1r), AP-2 complex subunit alpha-2 (Ap2a2), Synaptotagmin-1 (Syt1) and Synaptotagmin-2 (Syt2), were differently ubiquitinated in mHtt samples (Fig. 3E). Second, we observed differential ubiquitination of proteins involved in translation in the soluble fraction and in the insoluble fraction we observed increased levels of proteins with a role in mRNA processing and gene expression. It has been shown that the Htt protein interacts with its own mRNA, RNA binding proteins and translation factors (52) and that Htt is involved in the trafficking of mRNAs (53). Third, proteins involved in catabolic processes were differentially ubiquitinated in the soluble fraction, such as several proteasome subunits and E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch. For instance, we found that USP14 was more ubiquitinated at K64 in its Ubiquitin-like (UBL) domain in wildtype samples in the soluble fraction. It was found that overexpression of USP14 reduces mHtt aggregates in cells via the ubiquitin-proteasome system (54). We found that E3 ubiquitin ligase Itch was more ubiquitinated at K407 in mutant samples of the soluble fraction. It has been shown that Itch co-localizes with polyQ-expanded Htt and Ataxin-3 aggregates and overexpression of Itch reduced the aggregation (55). Lastly, we observed significantly reduced levels of several proteins belonging to either complex I (Ndufa2, Ndufa5, Ndufa6, Ndufb3, Ndufs8) or complex IV (Cox5b, Cox6b1, Cox6c) of the oxidative phosphorylation machinery in the insoluble fraction of mutant Htt brain samples (Fig. 4E, cluster 3). These complexes are in the mitochondrial inner membrane and are required for the production of ATP. Complexes I, III and IV are responsible for the relocation of protons from the mitochondrial matrix to the intermembrane space, whereas complex V generates ATP. Deficiency of Complexes II, III and IV have been associated with HD in postmortem brains of patients (56, 57). Restoration of the activity of complex IV in HD transgenic mice was found to be neuroprotective (58). Our observations of changes in both protein levels and ubiquitination status might shed light on how these processes are affected in late stage HD disease, both at the protein level and at the level of regulation via the ubiquitin system. Knowledge about differential ubiquitination of known players and the identification of new proteins that might be involved in these processes in HD might be useful for groups who study these processes in detail. Correlation Between Protein and diGly Site Fold Changes—We observed many changes in diGly site abundances in wild-type and mutant Htt brain samples, both in the soluble and insoluble fraction. Increased diGly site abundances could have been derived from increased levels of proteins of which the same percentage is ubiquitinated, or from increased ubiquitination of a stable amount of protein. In the soluble fraction we did not observe relative differences at the protein level for 

most of the proteins, which suggests that increased diGly site abundances were the result of increased protein ubiquitination for most of the cases. Comparisons like these have been made for cells treated with proteasome inhibitors. In those studies, the abundance of a small group of proteins was significantly decreased or increased, but the protein abundances of the majority of the proteins were not affected, whereas many of these proteins were significantly differentially ubiquitinated (59). In the insoluble fraction we observed a group of proteins of which both the relative abundance at the global proteome and the diGly-modified proteome were increased, suggesting that protein fold change contributed to the diGly site fold changes. Examples of proteins in this group are ubiquitin (K48 ubiquitination), Sequestosome/p62 (K422, K437), Glial fibrillary acidic protein (Gfap) (K92, K394), Neurofilament light polypeptide (nefl) (K15, K294) and Neurofilament medium polypeptide nefm (K296, K434), among others. Sequestosome-1 was ubiquitinated at K422 which is situated in the ubiquitin-associating (UBA) domain and at K437 which is flanking the UBA domain. It was shown that Htt acts as a scaffold for selective autophagy through interaction with sequestosome-1, K63-polyubiquitinated cargo proteins and LC3 (60). Glial fibrillary acidic protein is expressed in activated astrocytes and the degree of activation correlates with Huntington’s disease progression (61). Neurofilament light polypeptide and Neurofilament medium polypeptide are subunits of neurofilaments and a component of the neuronal cytoskeleton. Neurofilament light protein has been proposed as a biomarker for HD as its increased levels in the cerebrospinal fluid and blood correlate with disease progression (62). The fact that we did not observe significant differences in the relative protein levels for most ub-modified proteins in the soluble fraction does not mean that ubiquitination did not affect the protein level. The subpopulation of the ubiquitinmodified proteins is generally much smaller than the averaged protein population, as such a decreased half-life of a small ubiquitin-modified subpopulation might not be detected at the protein level (63). The use of proteasome inhibitors or autophagy inhibitors o/n or knockdown of proteasome subunits for several days might be used to accumulate the pool of ub-modified proteins targeted for degradation (59, 63, 64). Final Remarks—Our data might reveal new players in pathways known to be affected in HD and might shed light on their regulation at the ubiquitin level. Further biochemical experiments might give mechanistic insights into these regulations, which is beyond the scope of this study. Additionally, performing global proteome and ubiquitinome studies in younger mice will be interesting as they will reveal differences between wild-type and mutant Htt mice brain in early stages of HD. Moreover, as the detection of mHtt diGly peptides in whole brain was successful, also the difference between HD affected and non-affected brain regions could be studied. Further, as in our study we could not discriminate between ubiquitination of full length Htt proteins or fragments thereof, 