
uble fractions. For the insoluble fractions we obtained a dense protein-protein association network for the proteins contributing to global proteome changes (Fig. 4A) whereas the network for up and downregulated diGly sites was relatively simple (Fig. 4B). Gene Ontology (GO) term analysis revealed that many enriched Biological Processes for the global proteome dataset of the insoluble fraction were shared with the datasets derived from the soluble fractions (transport, localization and metabolic processes). In addition, GO terms related with RNA splicing and mRNA processing were enriched in the global proteome of the insoluble fraction (Fig. 4C). GO terms enriched in the diGly data set were related to cellular organization and microtubule-based processes (Fig. 4D). Highly interconnected clusters were found in the proteinprotein association network of up- and downregulated proteins in the insoluble fraction (Fig. 4E). Proteins in the highest scoring cluster (cluster 1) were all upregulated in mutant Htt samples and played roles in mRNA processing and gene expression. In contrast, cluster 3 contains only proteins that were downregulated in mutant Htt samples, and these proteins play a role in the electron transport chain in mitochondria. The second cluster contains proteins upregulated in both wild-type and mutant Htt samples and play a role in cell adhesion, organelle fission and mitosis. A few clusters were found in the association network for the proteins of which diGly sites were found in the insoluble fraction (Fig. 4F). Although their scoring was relatively low and no GO terms were found to be enriched in this selection of proteins, several of these proteins are known to be present at Htt aggregates, so their differential ubiquitination might be interesting novel information for the field. Correlation Between Protein and diGly Site Fold Changes in HD—Next, we focused on the correlation between global proteome changes and changes in the ubiquitin-modified proteome in both the soluble and insoluble fractions. Fig. 5A shows this correlation, plotted using the ggplot2 package (43) in R (44), for all proteins and diGly sites that were identified in 3 out of 4 samples in both wild-type and mutant samples of the soluble fraction. Fold changes were much larger for many diGly sites as compared with protein fold changes. Relatively increased diGly site fold changes were observed both in wild-type and mutant samples and followed a normal distri

bution which was only slightly skewed toward the mutant Htt samples (density plot Fig. 5A). In the soluble fraction an increase in diGly site abundance in general did not correlate with an increase in protein abundance. The relative abundance of most of the proteins was not altered in the soluble fraction. Thus, in general, changes observed in diGly site abundance were not affected by changes at the protein level for most of the proteins in the soluble fraction. Fig. 5B shows the correlation for all proteins and diGly sites that were identified in 3 out of 4 replicates in both wild-type and mutant samples of the insoluble fraction. DiGly site fold changes follow a normal distribution, which is however clearly skewed toward the mutant samples. Some diGly sites were upregulated as well as their proteins, such as the K48 diGly site of ubiquitin (Ubc K48) and both K422 and K437 diGly sites of sequestosome1 (Sqstm1/p62). There were also several diGly sites upregulated even though their proteins were not differentially up- or downregulated, such as Hsp90aa1 K112 and Calm3 K31 (Fig. 5B). The correlation of diGly sites, that were only identified in one group (either wild type or mutant), to their global proteins in both the soluble and insoluble fraction are plotted in supplemental Fig. S3A and S3B, respectively. In general, the protein fold change was not altered for the majority of the diGly sites that were identified in the soluble fraction (supplemental Fig. S3A). For a few proteins the fold change was increased in wild-type samples whereas diGly sites for these proteins were only found in mutant samples. For instance, the fold change of Htt was strongly decreased in the mutant soluble fraction whereas its K9 diGly site was only found in mutant samples. In the insoluble fraction relatively more proteins showed upregulation at both the protein level and diGly site level (supplemental Fig. S3B), which is in agreement with the data in Fig. 5B. For instance, ubiquilin-2 protein levels were increased in the insoluble fraction of mHtt samples whereas the protein was also more ubiquitinated at K58 and K66 (supplemental Fig. S3B). Also, the protein level and diGly site level (K979) of Myo5a, a Htt interaction partner (45) with a role in vesicular trafficking, were both upregulated in the mHtt insoluble fraction. Together these data show that in general protein fold changes did not affect the diGly site fold changes drastically. 

FIG. 3. Functional analysis of Huntington’s disease dependent changes in the global proteome and ubiquitinome of the soluble fractions of Q175FDN mouse brain lysates. A, STRING network analysis was performed on differentially expressed proteins in the soluble fraction. Orange is used for proteins identified exclusively in the mutant Htt samples (identified in 4 mutant samples and in 0 or 1 wild-type sample), whereas blue is used for proteins identified exclusively in wild-type samples (identified in 4 wild-type samples and in 0 or 1 mutant sample). A color gradient representing the protein fold change of orange (for upregulation in mutant) and blue (for upregulation in wild type) is used for significantly differentially expressed proteins (identified in at least 3 out of 4 mutant and wild-type samples, significant proteins in volcano plots Fig. 2B). B, Same as in Fig. 3A, but for diGly sites. Proteins of diGly sites upregulated in both wild-type and mutant samples are shown in yellow. C, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed proteins in the global proteome of the soluble fraction. Top ten of enriched Biological Processes is shown, enrichment probability is represented by -log10 Benjamini Hochberg adjusted p value. D, Gene Ontology (GO) analysis of differentially expressed diGly sites in the soluble fraction. Top ten of enriched Biological Processes is shown, enrichment probability is represented by -log10 Benjamini Hochberg score. E, Cytoscape plugin MCODE revealed highly interconnected clusters in the STRING network of the differentially expressed diGly sites in the soluble fraction. Clusters with highest scores are shown here. See A and B for description of node color coding. 